Blog post announcing Agama 9 (#367)
yast/yast.github.io: _posts/2024-06-28-agama-9.md

---
layout: post
date: 2024-06-28 07:00:00 +00:00
title: Announcing Agama 9
description: Hello from the openSUSE Conference 2024!
permalink: blog/2024-06-28/agama-9
tags:
  - Project
  - Programming
  - Systems Management
  - YaST
  - Agama
---

[Agama 8](https://yast.opensuse.org/blog/2024-05-17/agama-8) was a massive release. It took almost
five months of work and, as a result, Agama got a new HTTP API and a more powerful user interface
for setting up storage devices. Not that bad, uh?

> After such a big release, our UX expert shared with the team a prototype for a new web user

Reviewer: `our UX expert shared with the team a prototype for a new web user interface...`

what about

`our UX expert came with a completely new prototype for the web user interface...`

converting it to something it can understand. Moreover,
[Rules/Classes](https://doc.opensuse.org/documentation/leap/autoyast/html/book-autoyast/rulesandclass.html),
[Embedded Ruby](https://doc.opensuse.org/documentation/leap/autoyast/html/book-autoyast/erb-templates.html)
and
[pre-scripts](https://doc.opensuse.org/documentation/leap/autoyast/html/book-autoyast/cha-configuration-installation-options.html#pre-install-scripts)
are fully supported.

## Automated Installation {#auto-agama}

Support for automated installations using Agama has been greatly improved in this release too. The
most noticeable changes are:

- Agama provides more hardware information during Jsonnet profiles evaluation. You can find [an
  example](https://github.com/openSUSE/agama/blob/master/rust/agama-lib/share/examples/
  profile.jsonnet) in the repository.
- A new `legacy-autoyast-storage` section makes it possible to use an AutoYaST `<partitioning />`
  section in Agama.
- The command-line interface has received a significant update, including a handy
  `agama config edit` that allows you to change and apply the configuration from the comfort of your

>   favourite editor.

Reviewer: favorite (if you use US English)

{% include blog_img.md alt="'agama config edit' in action" src="agama-config-edit-mini.gif"
full_img="agama-config-edit.gif" %}

## A Better Installation Media {#live-iso}

The Agama Live ISO includes many security-related improvements. Until now, you could connect to a
system running the ISO by simply using `linux` as the root password. It was OK at the beginning of

> the development process, but it's not acceptable anymore.

Reviewer: but for `security reasons` it's not acceptable ... ?

> Now you can set your own password or, if you prefer, let Agama Live ISO generate a random one. You

Reviewer 2: Please add a link to the documentation: https://github.com/openSUSE/agama/blob/master/doc/live_iso.md#the-access-password

> can find the password in the console which, additionally, includes the fingerprints for the SSH host

Reviewer: in the `local` console? (just to make it clearer, but hard to tell if that really helps :D )

keys and the web server SSL certificate.

{% include blog_img.md alt="Live ISO console" src="live-iso-mini.png" full_img="live-iso.png" %}

> Another exciting addition is installing your own packages on the media. In previous versions, Agama

Reviewer 2: This wording os not clear and might be confusing. 
```suggestion
Another exciting addition is installing your own packages in the running Live system. In previous versions, Agama
```

Reviewer: Yes, additionally explaining why it matters would be even better (e.g., updating the installer, adding own modifications or extensions, etc.)

locked the packages database, but that's not the case anymore.

## See it in Action {#testing}

Do you want to give it a try to the new user interface? Or are you an "automate all the things" kind
of person? In any case, you can grab the
[Agama Live ISO testing images](https://download.opensuse.org/repositories/systemsmanagement:/Agama:/Devel/images/iso/)
and boot it on a virtual or bare-metal machine.

If you find any bug, please, do not hesitate to report it through our
[issues tracker](https://github.com/openSUSE/agama/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aopen+label%3Abug)

## See You Soon {#closing}

> As we anticipated the last week, part of the team is present at the

Reviewer: Clever computer says: As we anticipated last week (without `the`)
